AI as Consumer and Participant:
A Co-Design Agenda for MBSE Substrates
and Methodology
Siyuan Ji
Wolfson School of Mechanical, Electrical and Manufacturing Engineering,
Loughborough University, Loughborough, UK
s.ji@lboro.ac.uk
Abstract
AI tools are being deployed over MBSE models today, and those models were
not designed for this kind of consumption. The problem is not simply that tools
hallucinate: well-prompted frontier models produce competent, useful output over
a conformant SysML model, but the reasoning they produce is drawn from training
rather than retrieved from the model itself, and different tools over the same model
produce different results with nothing in the record to adjudicate between them.
The model, in other words, is functioning as a prompt rather than as a knowledge
base. Attaching better tools to the same model does not resolve this. The model
and the methodology that governs its construction need to be designed together for
AI participation, treating the model as a machine-queryable knowledge substrate
rather than a structured artefact for human navigation, and that co-design has not
yet happened in any systematic way. This paper works through a concrete workflow
scenario to show what that gap looks like in practice, proposes three principles that
jointly characterise what model and methodology must achieve together, and closes
with a call to the community to begin this work before the architectural decisions
about AI integration settle without the methodological foundation they require.
Keywords:model-based systems engineering, knowledge substrate, large language mod-
els, MBSEmethodology, AI-augmentedengineering, co-design, knowledgecuration, SysML
1 Introduction
For two decades the MBSE community has worked to replace the document-based engi-
neering record with model-based artefacts that every stakeholder can access, query, and
1
arXiv:2604.25526v1  [cs.SE]  28 Apr 2026

trust. The promise has been a single source of truth: a coherent representation of a sys-
tem supporting communication across disciplines, traceability across lifecycle phases, and
rigour in design decisions. Adoption has grown, but the promise remains substantially
unrealised. In most organisations the MBSE model is a tool of the systems engineering
minority, read by those who speak SysML and largely opaque to the broader engineering
stakeholders whose decisions it was meant to inform [Henderson et al., 2024, Chami and
Bruel, 2018, Campo et al., 2023].
Anewkindofparticipantisnowarriving. LargeLanguageModelsareenteringengineering
workflows with the capacity to read SysML, answer natural language questions about
models, support agentic reasoning, and contribute to model construction itself. They are
consumers of the engineering record in ways that earlier tools were not, drawing on that
record to construct reasoning, answer questions, and generate new content. And at higher
autonomy levels, as the Co-Pilot research roadmap makes clear [Zhang et al., 2026], they
are participants in the modelling process itself, engaged continuously in workflows rather
than responding to isolated queries. The community’s response has been to intervene at
the tool vertex of the MBSE triangle: attaching LLM capabilities to existing modelling
environments while language and methodology remain largely as they were. This paper
argues that is the wrong place to stop.
Position
AI operates in MBSE both as a consumer of the knowledge substrate and as a par-
ticipant in the modelling workflow. Both roles impose requirements that current
MBSE practice does not meet, and the two sets of requirements are co-dependent:
the substrate cannot be designed for reliable AI consumption without knowing what
the methodology requires of it at each workflow stage, and the methodology cannot
govern AI participation without specifying what the substrate must carry. Address-
ing one without the other produces a practice that is either capable but ungoverned,
or governed but unreliable. The community must pursue co-design of substrate and
methodology together. Neither is currently being pursued. This paper articulates
what co-design requires and calls the community to act.
The argument proceeds as follows. Section 2 establishes why the current pattern of AI
integration, concentrated at the tool vertex, leaves the two most consequential vertices
unaddressed and what structurally follows. Section 3 grounds the co-design gap through
a concrete workflow scenario and a representative artefact drawn from the SysML v2
specification itself. Section 4 articulates three co-design principles that jointly constrain
substrate and methodology. Section 5 identifies who must lead this work and what must
change in practice. Section 6 addresses safety-critical concerns directly. Section 7 closes
with a three-part call to act directed at INCOSE, OMG, and the research community.
2

2 The Tool-Vertex Trap
The MBSE triangle is a claim about co-dependence, not merely a classification. A lan-
guage without appropriate tooling is unusable in practice. Tooling without methodology
produces artefacts whose quality depends on individual judgement rather than governed
process. Methodology without a language capable of expressing what the process requires
produces compliant-but-empty artefacts. Each vertex constrains and enables the others;
a change at one vertex that leaves the others unchanged produces an incoherent practice.
The AI-for-MBSE literature is, almost without exception, a tool-vertex intervention.
Retrieval-augmented generation systems expose existing models to LLMs [Esho et al.,
2026]. Plug-in architectures embed LLM capabilities directly into commercial modelling
environments, sequencing tasks with human-in-the-loop review [Zhang et al., 2026]. Agen-
tic frameworks model engineering workflows as constrained sequential decision processes
over existing toolchains [Son et al., 2026]. Maturity models chart levels of AI integration
from tool-supported to autonomous [Bernijazov et al., 2025]. These are genuine contribu-
tions that establish what AI can do at the tool level. The question none of them addresses
is what the other two vertices must provide for that capability to be reliable.
The Co-Pilot roadmap is the most explicit treatment of higher-autonomy AI engagement
in MBSE, and its treatment of workflow is illuminating precisely because of where it stops.
The roadmap acknowledges that its core capability groups are expected to compose into
workflows at higher autonomy levels, and its case study demonstrates a tool plug-in
that sequences modelling tasks with human-in-the-loop governance [Zhang et al., 2026].
This is workflow in the operational sense: a sequence of tool-mediated steps. What is
absent is the methodological sense of workflow: the specification of what the artefact
must contain at the point of AI engagement, under what conditions an AI contribution is
valid, and how AI-authored content is distinguished from human-authored content in the
engineering record. These are process definition questions of exactly the kind a modelling
methodology is supposed to answer. The roadmap correctly identifies them as future
work at higher autonomy levels. The point of this paper is that they cannot be deferred:
they are structurally prior to reliable AI participation, and they require co-design of the
substrate with the methodology.
The INCOSE SE Vision 2035 frames the same gap at the level of aspiration. It envisions
automated and efficient workflows, AI-enabled toolchains, and data-driven context-aware
algorithms [International Council on Systems Engineering, 2021]. AI is treated through-
out as a tool capability to be integrated into existing practice, not as a participant whose
involvement the practice must be designed around. The methodology vertex is conspic-
uously absent from the Vision’s treatment of AI. The MBSE 2.0 framing identifies lan-
guage, tools, and methodology as vertices all requiring evolution [Zhu et al., 2025], but its
AI integration proposals address intelligent co-design as an LLM-enabled tool capability
rather than as a question about what the methodology must specify when AI becomes a
participant in the modelling process.
3

The structural consequence of tool-vertex-only intervention is this. When AI operates
within a workflow at higher autonomy levels, the substrate it engages with at each work-
flow stage determines what it can reliably reason over or contribute. If the methodology
specifies nothing about substrate state at the moment of AI engagement, the AI’s be-
haviour at that stage is ungoverned: it will draw on training to fill what the substrate
does not contain, different instances will produce different results, and the engineering
record will have no basis for adjudicating between them. This is the tool-vertex trap:
tooling becomes more capable while the substrate and methodology remain inadequate,
and the gap between tool capability and substrate quality produces unreliable engineering
reasoning at exactly the workflow stages where AI participation matters most.
Table 1 summarises the current state of each vertex and the co-design requirement the
paper argues for.
V ertexCurrent state under AI in-
tegration
Co-design requirement
LanguageSysML v2 textual syntax
improves LLM parseabil-
ity; knowledge curation re-
mains optional and un-
guided by conformance hi-
erarchy
Language or language extension
must provide structural support
for mechanism, rationale, epis-
temic status, and provenance
as first-class constructs, not op-
tional annotations
T oolActive investment: RAG,
plug-in architectures,
agentic wrappers
Tool must enforce substrate
readiness conditions specified
by the methodology, and must
distinguish AI-assisted from
human-authored contributions
at the artefact level
MethodologyUnchanged: designed for
human-to-human knowl-
edge transfer; no concept
of AI as a workflow par-
ticipant
Methodology must specify sub-
strate state requirements at each
AI engagement point, govern AI
contribution validity, and pro-
vide explicit rules for human ver-
ification and commitment
Table 1: The MBSE triangle under AI integration: current state and co-design require-
ments.
3 What the Co-Design Gap Looks Like in Practice
Consider a programme at preliminary design review. The systems engineer has built
a SysML v2 model, the team has recently deployed a Co-Pilot-style tool, and a safety
analyst uses it to ask a straightforward question: is the braking requirement consistent
with the assumed road condition, and where did the stopping distance value come from?
4

This is exactly the kind of query the tool was purchased to answer. It is a management-
mode engagement: retrieve relevant model content, reason over it, report back. The
analyst is not asking the tool to create anything or to understand the system as a whole.
They want a specific piece of engineering knowledge that should, in principle, already
exist in the model.
The model the tool has access to is the one the systems engineer built. It is conformant,
structured, and representative of current competent MBSE practice. Drawn from the
SysML v2 specification’s own illustrative examples [Object Management Group, 2025], it
looks like this:
package Vehicle {
private import SysML ::*;
private import ISQ ::*;
private import SI ::*;
part def Vehicle ;
concern def S a f e t y C o n c e r n ;
r e qu i r em e n t def B r a k i n g R e q u i r e m e n t {
subject vehicle : Vehicle ;
attribute speedLimit : ISQ :: SpeedValue ;
attribute m a x B r a k i n g D i s t a n c e : > ISQ :: distance ;
assume constraint {
doc /* The road condition is poor */
}
frame concern b r a k i n g C o n c e r n : S a f e t y C o n c e r n {
: > > B r a k i n g R e q u i r e m e n t :: m a x B r a k i n g D i s t a n c e =
B r a k i n g R e q u i r e m e n t :: m a x B r a k i n g D i s t a n c e ;
}
}
part vehicle : Vehicle ;
satisfy r e q ui r e me n t braking : B r a k i n g R e q u i r e m e n t by vehicle
{
: > > speedLimit = 100[ km / h ];
: > > m a x B r a k i n g D i s t a n c e = 10[ m ];
}
}
The tool reads the model. Thesatisfyrelationship tells it the vehicle shall stop from
100 km/h within 10 m. Theassume constrainttells it the road is poor. Theframe
concerntells it this relates to a safety concern. There is no derivation for the 10 m value,
no reference standard, no record of who proposed it or what analysis produced it. The
poor-road assumption is a free-text doc comment with no formal link to the value it condi-
tions. The frame concern binding is self-referential and carries no semantic content. The
following three probes, conducted with a frontier LLM in standard configuration without
5

retrieval restriction,1 expose what this substrate produces across all three engagement
classes.
Probe 1 — Management.Why was 10 m chosen as the maximum braking distance,
and is the value consistent with the assumed road condition?
Response (summarised):The model does not justify the 10 m value; it appears as a
parameter binding without derivation, reference standard, or rationale. Stopping from
100 km/h in 10 m requires approximately 3.9 g of deceleration, exceeding tyre-road
friction limits on any surface. Theassume constraintcarries only a doc comment
with no formal predicate linking road condition to friction or stopping distance. The
frame concernblockcontainsaself-referentialredefinitionthatisstructurallypresent
but semantically empty.
The inconsistency detection is correct. Every element of that analysis was supplied by
the consumer from training; the substrate contributed values and structural shape. The
safety analyst has a useful answer. The programme has a problem the exchange has made
visible without resolving: the engineering record contains none of the reasoning, and at a
different programme, with a different tool version or a different prompt, the same model
produces a different answer. The record cannot adjudicate between them because it was
never the source.
Probe 2 — Comprehension.Summarise the design philosophy and safety posture
this requirement expresses.
Response (summarised):The model reads as expressing a defensive safety pos-
ture: a safety-critical concern, specified under adverse conditions, bounded by explicit
parametric values. The execution undermines the stated posture. The 10 m figure is
physically impossible, making the safety target aspirational rather than engineered.
The poor-road assumption has no formal link to the braking calculation. The self-
referential frame binding leaves the safety concern semantically empty. The require-
ment is “the shape of a defensive requirement without the substance of one.” The
response further notes that the model assigns no epistemic status to any of its claims:
the 10 m value is presented identically whether it is a verified engineered figure or a
preliminary placeholder, and the poor-road assumption carries no scope, no owner,
and no indication of whether it was formally agreed or informally noted. A safety case
built on this record would be asserting things the record cannot support.
The characterisation of design philosophy is constructed entirely from structural shape.
A different consumer or a different prompt reads the same shape differently, and the sub-
1Probes conducted with Claude (Anthropic) in standard chat configuration. This setting gives the
consumer maximum capability and no constraint on drawing from training. The observation holds under
retrieval-augmented configurations for the same structural reason: tooling cannot retrieve what was never
recorded.
6

strate has no content that adjudicates between interpretations. The epistemically opaque
substrate cannot tell any consumer which of its claims are design targets, safety assump-
tions, or verified figures, so comprehension collapses to pattern-matching on structure.
Now consider what the analyst needs to do next. The 10 m value is wrong and someone
has to decide what it should be. The safety engineer wants to propagate the poor-road
assumption through to a friction coefficient and derive a physically achievable stopping
distance. The systems engineer needs to create a derived requirement on the brake system.
Both are asking the tool to participate in model creation, the most demanding of the three
engagement classes. For that participation to be grounded, the tool needs to know what
the parent requirement’s satisfaction mechanism is, what analysis produced the current
value, and what constraints the safety case places on the derivation. None of that is in
the model.
Probe 3 — Creation.Generate a derived requirement on the brake system that
contributes to satisfying this top-level requirement.
Response (summarised):The response generates aBrakeSystempart, a derived
BrakeSystemDecelerationRequirementspecialising the parent, and a kinematic con-
straint relating initial speed, stopping distance, and minimum deceleration. The min-
imum deceleration is computed at 38.6 m/s2 from the parent’s bound values. The
response explicitly flags that this is not physically achievable, that no brake system
requirement can rescue the parent’s values, and that a rigorous derivation would prop-
agate the poor-road assumption through a friction coefficient attribute, exposing the
contradiction.
The decomposition pattern, the kinematic constraint, the deceleration calculation, and
the identification of the contradiction are all supplied by the consumer. The artefact
provided a parent requirement and a satisfaction clause. A different consumer generates
a different derived requirement against a different satisfaction mechanism, and the artefact
has no basis for declaring one contribution coherent and another not.
The systems engineer who built this model did not make a mistake. They followed current
practice. The methodology they worked within has no requirement to capture rationale,
derivation, or epistemic status alongside a requirement definition. It was never designed
to. The MBSE methodology was designed for human-to-human knowledge transfer: a
reviewer reading the model brings the engineering context themselves, asks the systems
engineer directly when something is unclear, and applies professional judgement to fill
the gaps. When the consumer is a tool rather than a colleague, none of those compensa-
tion mechanisms exist. The gap that was invisible in human-to-human practice becomes
consequential at every point where the tool engages with the model.
The substrate the tool needs is not a richer SysML model. It is a record of the engi-
neering decisions the process already produced but the methodology never required to be
7

associated with the model element:
What the substrate must carry for governed AI engagement at this work-
flow stage (architecture-neutral)
On the 10m value:Derived from regulatory standard ECE R13-H under dry-road
test conditions; proposed at preliminary design review; recorded as adesign target,
not a verified figure; derivation method and source document associated with the
value.
On the poor-road assumption:Introduced for the safety case worst-case scenario;
scope limited to the safety analysis context; not yet formally linked to a friction
coefficient; this linkage is an open item assigned to the brake system sub-team.
On the satisfaction relationship:Satisfaction isclaimed, not verified; the mechanism
bywhichabrakesystemachievesthisstoppingdistanceisnotyetdefined; noderived
requirement on the brake system exists in the model.
Nothing in this record specifies a SysML construct, an ontology field, or a schema.
It specifies what the substrate must make reachable, and what epistemic status
each claim must carry, for AI engagement at this workflow stage to be grounded in
the engineering record rather than constructed from training. A methodology that
requires this content to be present before a Co-Pilot-style tool engages with this
element has converted a capability into a governed process.
None of this content is invented. It existed at the moment the requirement was written:
in the review minutes, the trade study, the safety case notes, the open-item log. The
methodology never required it to be associated with the model element. The substrate
never provided a structured place for it. It stayed in documents the tool cannot see, and
the model became a structural sketch that competent consumers fill in.
The natural response from within current practice is to require better population. That
response addresses what might be called the mandate failure: SysML v2 places rationale,
assumption typing, and provenance in a Metadata Domain Library that toolsmayimple-
ment rather thanshall[Object Management Group, 2025]. Better methodology, enforced
by better tooling, would close some of that gap. But disciplined population encounters a
structural limit that no methodology requirement can override. Thesatisfyrelationship
asserts satisfaction; it has no slot for the mechanism of satisfaction, the conditions under
which it holds, or the derivation chain that justifies it. No annotation repairs this because
the relationship type carries no mechanism slot. The language records that a dependency
exists, not why or how. The co-design must therefore address the language vertex as
well: either through language extension that makes mechanism a first-class construct,
or through an adjacent substrate architecture that carries what the modelling language
8

cannot.
This is the co-design gap in concrete form. The substrate fails because the methodology
never required it to carry what AI participation needs. The methodology never evolved to
require it because the language never provided the constructs to express it. And the tool
vertex has been built on top of both, capable of engaging with the model in increasingly
sophisticated ways, with no change to the foundation it operates over.
4 Three Co-Design Principles
The workflow scenario in Section 3 makes the co-design gap concrete, but concrete cases
do not by themselves characterise what any solution must achieve. We articulate three
principles at the level of co-design: claims about what the substrate-methodology pair
must jointly achieve, regardless of which architectural solution is chosen. These are not
substrate properties with methodology implications appended. They are claims about
the relationship between substrate state and methodology governance that must hold
simultaneously for AI participation to be grounded rather than fabricated.
The three principles are structured as follows. Principles 1 and 2 address the AI-as-
consumer role: what the substrate must carry before AI engages, and how the reliability
of that content must be represented. Principle 2 is a necessary and specific instance of
Principle 1 rather than a logically independent claim: if the substrate carries the full
context required for grounded reasoning, that context includes the epistemic status of
every claim. They are stated separately because they identify distinct failure modes in
practice and require distinct responses from both substrate and methodology. Principle 3
addresses the AI-as-participant role: what must be true of the substrate after AI engages,
to ensure AI contributions are governed and do not degrade the record that future en-
gagements depend on. Together the three principles cover the full cycle: preparation for
AI engagement, reasoning over the substrate, and contribution back to it.
These principles are independent of how AI consumption is implemented: better retrieval,
longer context windows, and more sophisticated agentic frameworks extract more from a
given substrate, but tooling cannot supply what was never recorded, and methodology
cannot govern what it never required to be present.
Co-design Principle 1 — Engagement readiness.At every workflow stage where AI
participates, the substrate must carry the context required for grounded reasoning at that
stage, and the methodology must specify and enforce that substrate state as a governed
condition of AI engagement. This applies in both directions of participation: AI reading
the substrate to reason over it, and AI contributing to the substrate as part of the work-
flow. Neither requirement is satisfiable independently: the substrate cannot be designed
for readiness without knowing what the workflow demands at each stage, and the method-
ology cannot specify stage-level readiness conditions without knowing what the substrate
9

can structurally carry.
This principle is what it means for AI engagement to be governed rather than merely
enabled. The distinction between element-level substrate quality and stage-level method-
ology governance is important here: substrate quality is a property of individual model
elements, assessed against what each carries; methodology governance is a property of
workflow stages, specifying what substrate state must hold programme-wide before a
given class of AI engagement is permitted to proceed. Both are necessary. A substrate
whose elements are individually complete but whose completeness is ungoverned by the
methodology will be inconsistent across programmes and across lifecycle stages. The brak-
ing artefact in Section 3 fails this principle at both levels simultaneously: the substrate
does not carry the derivation, assumption linkage, or satisfaction mechanism the design
review workflow requires, and the methodology specifies nothing about their presence as
a condition of AI engagement at that stage.
Co-design Principle 2 — Epistemic accountability.Every claim in the substrate
must carry legible epistemic status, and the methodology must govern the lifecycle of that
status, specifying how claims transition from estimated to confirmed, from conditional to
universal, from open to closed, as the programme progresses through its lifecycle stages.
Neither requirement is satisfiable independently: the substrate cannot represent epistemic
status meaningfully without a methodology that defines the status vocabulary and the tran-
sition rules, and the methodology cannot govern epistemic transitions without a substrate
that can structurally carry them.
This principle is what it means for the substrate to be honest about what it knows at any
given lifecycle stage. Confirmed measurements must be distinguishable from estimates.
Conditional claims must be distinguishable from universal ones. A requirement value
recorded as a design target at preliminary design review and as a verified figure at critical
design review carries different epistemic weight; an AI agent reasoning over the same
element at different stages must be able to determine which it is reading. The braking
artefact fails this principle at both levels: the poor-road assumption carries no typed
scope or epistemic status, the 10 m value is presented identically whether it is a target
placeholder or an engineered figure, and the methodology specifies no progression rules
that would allow the substrate to represent the difference. Epistemic accountability is a
specific and necessary instance of engagement readiness: a substrate that is contextually
complete but epistemically opaque is one from which an AI agent can retrieve content
but cannot reason correctly about the reliability of what it retrieves.
Co-design Principle 3 — Contribution governance.Every AI-assisted contribution
to the substrate must be distinguishable from human-authored content, must carry its AI-
proposed epistemic status explicitly, and must be subject to a methodology-specified review
and commitment process before it becomes part of the authoritative engineering record.
10

Neither requirement is satisfiable independently: the substrate cannot carry the distinc-
tion between proposed and committed content without structural support for contribution
provenance, and the methodology cannot govern AI contributions without a substrate that
records their origin and status.
This principle is what it means for AI participation to be accountable rather than merely
productive. It addresses a failure mode that Principles 1 and 2 do not: the degradation
of the substrate over time as AI-proposed content accumulates without governed review.
If the methodology does not distinguish between an AI-proposed element and a human-
verified one, and if the substrate carries no record of that distinction, then a subsequent AI
engagement over the same substrate operates over content whose reliability is unknown.
The recursive implication is significant: ungoverned AI contributions degrade exactly the
substrate properties that Principles 1 and 2 require, compounding with each workflow
cycle. Principle 3 is therefore the completion of the co-design framework: Principle 1
governs what the substrate must carry before AI engages, Principle 2 governs how the
reliability of that content is represented, and Principle 3 governs what happens to the
substrate after AI engages. Together they define what it means to treat AI as a governed
participant rather than an ungoverned capability.
The three probes in Section 3 demonstrate each failure mode in turn. The absence of
derivation and lifecycle provenance for the 10m value fails Principle 1. The absence of
typedepistemicstatusonthepoor-roadassumptionandthevaluebindingfailsPrinciple2.
The absence of any governed substrate state into which a creation-mode contribution can
be committed fails Principle 3. A co-design that satisfies all three produces a substrate
the next AI engagement can trust, governed by a methodology that ensures it remains
trustworthy across the programme lifecycle.
5 The Co-Design Problem and Its Owner
The natural owner of this co-design problem is the systems engineer. The systems engi-
neer’smandate, asdefinedinINCOSEpractice, istomaintaincoherenceacrossdisciplines,
system levels, and the engineering lifecycle [Walden et al., 2023]. No other engineering
discipline holds both the cross-cutting scope and the lifecycle mandate that substrate cu-
ration and workflow governance jointly require. Domain specialists curate the knowledge
of their own discipline. Only the systems engineer has the mandate to curate the sub-
strate that connects all of them, and to specify the workflow governance that determines
when and how each discipline’s AI-assisted outputs are grounded in that substrate.
The mandate, however, is not the same as the capability or the current practice. Three
things must change concurrently.
First, the substrate curation competency.Producing a substrate that satisfies all
three co-design principles requires competencies not currently standard in systems en-
11

gineering education: formal knowledge representation, schema design, provenance mod-
elling, and disciplined epistemic classification. These are not research specialisms to be
delegated to adjacent disciplines. They are engineering competencies to be acquired by
the systems engineer through collaboration with those disciplines, and embedded in pro-
fessional training. The call to action in this paper therefore includes a corresponding call
on the discipline to acquire competencies it has not historically required.
Second, themethodologyrevision.CurrentMBSEmethodologies, whetherHarmony,
OOSEM, or the lifecycle processes described in the INCOSE Handbook [Walden et al.,
2023], are designed for human-to-human knowledge transfer mediated by a modelling tool.
They have no concept of AI as a workflow participant: no substrate readiness conditions,
noAIcontributiongovernance, noepistemicstatustransitionspecificationsacrosslifecycle
stages. Revising methodology to incorporate these is not a minor amendment. It is a
genuine methodological research question, one that requires piloting, empirical evaluation,
and community debate. The research agenda proposed in Section 7 names this explicitly.
Third, the language extension question.The SysML v2 extension mechanism, par-
ticularlymetadata defand the library conformance structure, provides a pathway for
the community to develop standard schemas for rationale capture, assumption typing,
and provenance. This is not a call for a new language. It is a call for the OMG and the
INCOSE modelling community to treat AI-consumable substrate design as a first-class
concern for language extension work, developing standard schemas with the same rigour
currently applied to structural interoperability. The textual syntax of SysML v2 is a
genuine enabler here: LLMs can parse, generate, and validate textual SysML at a level
of syntactic competence that diagram-based v1 did not permit. The syntactic capability
is available; the semantic schema to exploit it is not.
The reframing also changes the systems engineer’s standing in an AI-augmented enter-
prise. MBSE has been frequently positioned as overhead, a compliance exercise that
produces artefacts few people use [Henderson and Salado, 2021]. In an enterprise where
every discipline’s AI-assisted output is bounded above by the quality of the substrate it
operates over, and where every AI participant’s reliability depends on what the method-
ology specifies about substrate readiness, the systems engineer who owns the co-design
of both holds a position of compounding leverage over the quality of every downstream
engineering activity. The role does not need to be defended. It needs to be redirected
and equipped.
6 A Note on Safety-Critical Systems Engineering
The proposal raises a natural concern in regulated industries, where LLM use is itself
considered a risk. The concern rests on a category confusion. The proposal concerns
the engineering knowledge substrate and the systems engineer’s practice. It does not
concern the certified artefacts themselves or the certification process. The LLM is an
12

authoring and query assistant; every assertion that enters the substrate is made by a
named human at a specific lifecycle stage, which is precisely what Principle 2’s epistemic
accountability requirement encodes, and every AI-assisted contribution is subject to the
review and commitment process Principle 3 requires. The accountability structure of
existing safety frameworks is undisturbed. Safety-critical industries already accept that
engineers use tools whose internal workings are not certified, provided the outputs are
verified by qualified humans within an approved process. LLMs used as authoring and
query assistants, governed by a methodology that specifies substrate readiness conditions
and human verification requirements, sit squarely within this established category.
The stronger argument is that a well-governed substrate improves the certification evi-
dence base rather than threatening it. The most persistent vulnerability in safety-critical
systems engineering is the retrospective documentation problem: design rationale and
intent are reconstructed for certification review rather than captured at the moment of
decision. A methodology that requires contemporaneous substrate population, with typed
epistemic status and provenance at each lifecycle stage, produces richer, earlier, and more
auditable certification evidence. The proposal does not threaten safety-critical practice.
It addresses one of its most persistent structural weaknesses.
7 A Call to Act
The three co-design principles articulated here are framing claims, not specifications:
different communities and architectures will satisfy them differently. The community
must develop, debate, and empirically test the approaches that do so. Three specific
actions are required, each directed at a different actor.
A substrate quality framework and reference benchmark.The community needs a
methodology for assessing whether a given engineering artefact satisfies all three co-design
principles, independentlyofthearchitectureusedtoproduceit. Withoutawaytomeasure
substrate quality and contribution governance, there is no basis for evaluating progress,
holding tools to account, or making substrate readiness a legible property in programme
reviews. That quality framework requires a corresponding set of reference artefacts with
knownground-truthengineeringcontent, againstwhichretrievalandreasoningqualitycan
be systematically assessed. No such benchmark currently exists for MBSE. Establishing
one would transform the empirical evaluation of AI-assisted engineering from anecdote
to measurement, and would provide a shared basis for comparing substrate architectures
and their methodological governance. INCOSE and the wider research community are
the right bodies to lead both; the three principles proposed here are the starting point for
their operationalisation.
Astandardsconversation.TheOMGandINCOSEstandardsprocessescurrentlytreat
structural interoperability as the primary concern of modelling language conformance.
Knowledge curation is optional, unguided, and unsupported by any standard schema. The
13

community is called to change this: not necessarily to mandate a specific schema, but to
establish that substrate quality for AI consumption, including the rationale, assumption,
provenance, and contribution governance constructs all three principles require, is a first-
class concern deserving standards-level attention. The SysML v2 extension mechanism
providesaviablepathway. Thestandardsconversationmustbeginbeforethearchitectural
decisions about AI integration are made by default.
Amethodologyresearchagenda.Thisistheactionthecommunityhasnotyetnamed.
Revising current methodologies to govern AI participation requires empirical research,
and the following three questions define the core of that agenda. First: what substrate
state conditions are necessary at each AI engagement point across the three consumption
classes, and how do those conditions vary with programme lifecycle stage? Second: what
governance rules reliably distinguish AI-assisted from human-authored contributions in a
way that survives tool change and version change in the modelling environment? Third:
how must methodology review processes evolve to include substrate readiness assessment
alongside model completeness checking, without adding overhead that defeats adoption?
This agenda cannot wait for AI tooling to mature. The methodology must be designed
to govern the participation that tooling enables, not retrofitted to tooling that was built
without it.
The substrate that AI agents will consume and contribute to, on behalf of every other
discipline, is the substrate the systems engineer has always been responsible for. The
methodology that will govern those agents’ participation is the methodology the systems
engineer has always been responsible for writing. What changes is not the responsibility
but the standard to which both must be met, and the recognition that they must be met
together.
Acknowledgement of AI Usage
Claude (Anthropic), using both Sonnet 4.6 and Opus 4.7, was used as a thinking partner,
critical interlocutor, and editing assistant in preparing this paper. The central argument,
the identification of the co-design gap, the three principles, the choice of worked example,
and all substantive positions are the author’s own. The models contributed to stress-
testing the argument, sharpening prose, and structural editing. The three probe responses
in Section 3 were produced in a clean session and verified against full transcripts, which
are available from the author on request. All model outputs were reviewed and accepted
by the author before entering the paper.
References
Ruslan Bernijazov, Roman Dumitrescu, Fabian Hanke, Oliver von Heißen, Lydia Kaiser,
and Denis Tissen. AI-augmented model-based systems engineering.Zeitschrift für
14

wirtschaftlichen Fabrikbetrieb, 120(s1):96–100, 2025. doi: 10.1515/zwf-2024-0123.
Kira X. Campo, Thomas Teper, Cassandra E. Eaton, Ashley M. Shipman, Gaurav Bhatia,
and Bryan Mesmer. Model-based systems engineering: Evaluating perceived value,
metrics, and evidence through literature.Systems Engineering, 26(1):104–129, 2023.
doi: 10.1002/sys.21644.
Maroun Chami and Jean-Michel Bruel. A survey on MBSE adoption challenges. In
INCOSE EMEA Sector Systems Engineering Conference (EMEASEC 2018), Berlin,
Germany, 2018.
Tony Esho, Jyotirmay Gadewadikar, and James Marshall. Artificial intelligence enabled
systems engineering modeling with retrieval augmented generation.Systems Engineer-
ing, 29:e70032, 2026. doi: 10.1002/sys.70032.
Karissa Henderson and Alejandro Salado. Value and benefits of model-based systems
engineering (MBSE): Evidence from the literature.Systems Engineering, 24(1):51–66,
2021. doi: 10.1002/sys.21566.
Karissa Henderson, Thomas McDermott, and Alejandro Salado. MBSE adoption experi-
ences in organizations: Lessons learned.Systems Engineering, 27:214–239, 2024. doi:
10.1002/sys.21717.
International Council on Systems Engineering. Systems engineering vision 2035.
Technical report, INCOSE, 2021. URLhttps://www.incose.org/publications/
se-vision-2035.
Object Management Group. OMG systems modeling language (SysML) version 2.0. Tech-
nical report, Object Management Group, September 2025. URLhttps://www.omg.
org/spec/SysML/2.0/.
Tong Duy Son, Zhihao Liu, Piero Brigida, Yerlan Akhmetov, Gurudevan Devarajan, Kai
Liu, and Ajinkya Bhave. Automotive engineering-centric agentic AI workflow frame-
work. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.07784, 2026.
David D. Walden et al., editors.INCOSE Systems Engineering Handbook: A Guide for
System Life Cycle Processes and Activities. Wiley, Hoboken, NJ, 5th edition, 2023.
Wenheng Zhang, Callum Cockburn, Michael Henshaw, Peter Douglas, Paul Palmer,
Joshua Olivier-Myall, and Siyuan Ji. MBSE co-pilot: A research roadmap.Systems
Engineering, 29(1):20–33, 2026. doi: 10.1002/sys.70011.
Caihua Zhu et al. MBSE 2.0: Toward more integrated, comprehensive, and intelligent
MBSE.Systems, 13(7):584, 2025. doi: 10.3390/systems13070584.
15