

===== PAGE 1 =====
ScienceDirect
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Procedia CIRP 136 (2025) 61–66
2212-8271 © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 )
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 35th CIRP Design 2025
10.1016/j.procir.2025.08.013
Keywords: artifical intelligence, model based systems engineering; behavior modelling; design methodology, tools and technologies 
1. Introduction 
Production companies face constantly numerous challenges 
because of, amongst others, increasing customer expectations, 
global competition and raising sustainability efforts. Several 
industries undergo currently fundamental changes, for instance 
the automotive industry, which is realizing the transformation 
towards electro-mobility and autonomous driving. Artificial 
intelligence (AI) is considered a high-potential approach to 
support companies in this challenge; AI may support several 
processes in production companies and can have a significant 
impact on the digital transformation of organizations [1]. 
However, whereas the media coverage on the use of AI in 
recent years was very positive, it is indicated that in some 
sectors enthusiasm has given way to disillusionment [2]. It is 
important to note that AI implementation requires sophisticated 
processes, changes in established practices and management 
styles [1]. The research described in this paper intends to 
propose a concept of a framework which allows the application 
of AI in and for model-based systems engineering processes of 
products and the respective automated production systems. 
This framework is based on a novel, AI-based, self-learning 
engineering model which integrates product and production 
models which map function, behavior and product geometry. 
35th CIRP Design Conference
Application of artificial intelligence in model-based systems engineering of 
automated production systems 
Timo Schuchtera, Patrick Saft a, Ralf Stettera,*, Markus Pfeila, Wolfram Höpkena, Markus Tilla, 
Stephan Rudolphb
a Ravensburg-Weingarten University (RWU), Doggenriedstraße, 88250 Weingarten, Germany
b Institute of Aircraft Design, University of Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring 31, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany 
* Corresponding author. Tel.: 00497515019822. E-mail address: ralf.stetter@rwu.de
Abstract 
Despite the incontestable appeal, the application of artificial intelligence (AI) in engineering processes is still limited to isolated applications and, 
in some fields, enthusiasm has given way to disillusionment. This paper aims to contribute to a concept of a framework that allows the application 
of AI in model-based systems engineering (MBSE) processes of automated production systems; the main focus is hereby on the MBSE processes. 
The aim of the complete framework is to realize an AI-based, self-learning digital twin that automatically adapts to the real system behavior and 
represents an optimal image of a product and its production process at all times. An expressive, semantic overall model serves as the basis for 
new approaches to artificial intelligence. In the complete framework, knowledge gained using AI methods is integrated into the overall model 
and thus brought into an overall context. Such an overall model improves the interpretability and explainability of the AI models and enables 
complex analyses, simulations and forecasts. The core element of the approach is a novel, AI-based, self-learning engineering model consisting 
of a product and production model that maps function, behavior and product geometry. Graph-based design languages are used for forming a 
central data model and functional mock-up units are applied for continuous co-simulation. The approach is underlined by means of an application 
to the design of automated assembly systems.   
© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V . 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 35th CIRP Design 2025

===== PAGE 2 =====
62 Timo Schuchter  et al. / Procedia CIRP 136 (2025) 61–66
In this framework, graph-based design languages (GBDLs)
are applied in order to achieve a consistent and semantically 
rich central data model and functional mock-up units (FMUs) 
are applied in order to enable continuous co-simulation. The 
GBDLs can be applied to include information in form of 
ontologies, to enable the storage in a central data model and to 
realize an integrated development environment by employing 
the software Design Compiler 43 [3]. It is intended 
to apply functional mock-up units (FMUs) [4] in order to 
enable a flexible, modularized co-simulation framework for the 
integrated development process. 
In order to be able to address these intentions, the following 
research question needs be answered:
How can an engineering framework based on model-based 
systems engineering be designed to enable an effective and 
efficient application of artificial intelligence in all stages of an 
integrated product and automated production system 
development process?
The different stages of an integrated product and 
productions system processes are visible in Figure 1.
Fig. 1. Process depiction of an integrated product and production 
development process
The main element of the process shown in Fig. 1 are two 
connected V-models as suggested e. g. by VDI/VDE2206 [5]. 
The first V-model describes the typical development process of 
a mechatronic or cyber-physical product with the determination 
of the functional, logical architecture and physical architecture, 
the domain specific development of modules and the 
integration and verification. Similarly, the second connected V-
model describes the analog activities for the production system.
The interconnected V-models lead to a product and service 
description, to the actual production operation, the product 
delivery and its operation as well as for the recycling of the 
product. Therefore, the most important areas of activity in the 
development and operation of a product and its respective 
production system are covered. Additionally, in Fig. 1 the 
numbers 1 to 7 indicate areas in the integrated product and 
production development process within which an application of 
AI may be sensible. These possible applications are explained 
in the following list.
1. One main field for the application of AI is during the 
operation of the product. Several research initiatives 
explore the application of AI in the operation of 
autonomous and semi-autonomous cars in areas such as 
advanced driver assisting systems, car emissions, 
predictive maintenance, security, connected vehicles, and 
driver monitoring systems [6]. In electronic products such 
as smartphones, AI is already used in several practical 
applications such as image editing.  
2. The second most obvious field for the application of AI is 
the operation of production systems. Possible use cases 
are the detection of faulty assembly processes e. g. by 
means of defect-detection strategies [7], [8], preventive 
maintenance through anomaly detection and energy 
efficiency optimization [9].  A current study was able to 
identify 20 different use cases for AI in the car production 
process [2]. Several research and implementation groups 
are currently addressing this challenge and multiple 
studies demonstrate that AI can be a key enabling 
technology and may support industrial companies with 
complex problems [7]. 
3. In general, it is possible that AI is also applied in the 
product recycling stage, which is an important part of a 
circular economy. For instance, it has been pointed out 
that AI may support to loops by improving logistics chains
in reverse logistics operations [10].
4. AI also can be used as a tool to support product design 
engineers during the design of the system architecture and 
product components. This is a bit less obvious than 
especially points one and two but the improvement 
potential is very high. One prominent example is design 
optimization; in this endeavor AI can help to avoid getting 
stuck in local minima or maxima and to explore the design 
space efficiently for finding the global optima [11].
5. Similarly, the production system engineers can also be 
supported during the design of the production system 
architecture and the design of the production tools and the 
selection of assembly resources. Also, the generation of 
the computer programs e. g. for PLCs or of energy 
efficient robot trajectories can be AI supported [9].    
6. In the product development V-model, verification is an 
important activity which can also be supported by AI. For 
instance, AI can help to develop testing plans; engineer 
may more efficiently search through the space of possible 
experiments and find the global optima much faster than 
with conventional approaches [11].
7. Also, during the verification of the production system AI 
can be applied in a similar manner than in the verification 
of the product (point 6 in Fig. 1).
The application of AI in all seven stages of an integrated 
design process requires a considerable amount of data which 
contains structural information concerning the product and 
production systems as well as procedural data concerning 
parameters and behavior of all entities; the complete structural 
and procedural information over the whole life-cycle can form 
a digital twin (DT), which also enable bilateral data exchange 
with the real world [9]. Additionally, for a re-integration of the 
information generated by the AI, a modular approach is 
necessary. The scientific approach described in this paper is 
based on the one hand on GBDLs, which are used as the basis
of an engineering framework using the Unified Modeling 
product
physical
architecture
domain specific 
development
integration
verification
product
definition
production
requirements
production
system
development
functional
& logical 
architecture
physical
architecture
domain specific 
development
integration
verification
 product 
delivery
product 
operation
product 
recycling
functional
& logical
architecture
production 
operation
product and service 
description
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
DIGITAL
TWIN
product
requirements


===== PAGE 3 =====
Timo Schuchter  et al. / Procedia CIRP 136 (2025) 61–66 63
Language (UML) which is implemented in the software Design
Compiler 43 (DC43) and on the other hand on functional 
mock-up units (FMUs) which are applied in order to enable a 
modularized co-simulation framework for the integrated 
development process.
It is important to note that international standards and 
frameworks have to be considered in this endeavor, notably the 
Industrial Ontologies Foundry (IOF) [12], the Industrial Data 
Ontology (IDO) [13], the Information Modelling Framework 
(IMF) [14] and the Industrial Digital Twin Association (IDTA) 
[15]; for a concise overview see [16]. However, the work in this 
paper is still in its development phase and it still has to be 
determined which information entities are part of a mandatory 
information exchange and should therefore be part of a future 
consolidated standard and framework or just optional. As an 
analogy, the creation of the UML standard [17] was the final 
synthesis of three already proven methods for object oriented 
modelling that were already implemented and successfully 
executed in a multitude of software and engineering projects.      
This paper aims to present a concept of a framework together 
with its component and the application to the design of 
automated assembly system; this aim leads to the following 
structure of the paper. Section 2 described the concept of a self-
learning twin. The sensible application of GBDLs and the 
underlying ontologies for knowledge representation are 
described in Section 3. The use of FMUs in the integrated 
product development process and the modular integration of AI
are described in Section 4. Section 5 is focused on the 
description of the application to the automated assembly 
system, while Section 6 gives a summary and outlook.  
2. Concept of a self-learning digital twin
The central aim of the underlying research is to design an 
AI-based, self-learning and self-explanatory digital twin [18]
that automatically adapts to the real system behavior and 
represents a consistent image of the production process and 
product life cycle at all times. A central, semantically rich
model of the product, the production process and the product 
life cycle serves as the basis for a sensible application of AI. 
Insights gained using AI methods are in turn integrated into the 
overall model and are thus brought into an overall context. Such 
an overall model improves the interpretability and 
explainability of the AI models as well as their automatic 
adaptation and enables complex analyses and forecasts, in 
particular by means of simulation techniques (e. g. the 
prediction of expected performance and prevention of faults or 
the long-term optimization of the production process). The core 
element of the approach is a novel, AI-based, self-learning 
engineering model consisting of a product and production 
model that maps function, behavior and product geometry 
(Figure 2).
In the background the real production system and the real 
product are visible, containing amongst others sensors, product 
planning systems (PPS) and further external data sources. The 
self-learning digital twin, which is bidirectionally connected 
with the real world, contains the product, production and 
behavior models, the simulation environment as well as the AI 
components. The framework based on the concept shown in 
Figure 2 is suitable for the integrated, lifecycle-spanning 
mapping of cross-domain product and process data in the areas 
of function, behavior, structure and geometry. Sensors (e.g. 
including 3D sensors and camera technology) and actuators 
(e.g. integrated via a production planning and control system) 
are used to collect performance and execution data from the 
production process and link it to the product and production 
model in the form of a semantic annotation. AI techniques from 
the field of machine learning (e. g. artificial neural networks 
[ANNs] and deep learning) are used to evaluate the 
performance and execution data with the aid of the semantic 
model and generate insights into cause-effect relationships and 
process patterns in the form of AI models.
     Fig. 2. Concept of a self-learning AI-based digital twin
These are then integrated into the overall model in the sense 
of a self-learning digital twin and serve as input for the 
simulation of product [19], [20]. This type of successive 
enrichment of the overall model with recognized patterns and 
correlations allows the comparison with empirical values of 
previous findings and the (semi-)automatic testing of the 
findings for plausibility and causality [21], [22]. Techniques 
from the field of XAI are used to automatically explain and 
describe the AI models [23], e. g. by characterizing influential 
features or layer-wise relevance propagation. A methodological 
focus here is on the conception and testing of novel approaches 
for building understandable AI models based on a semantically 
rich product and production model (e. g. the construction of 
decision trees based on the overall model, which maps function, 
behavior and product geometry), especially as surrogate models 
for black box models such as ANNs [24]. 
During the initial phases of the research the abstract concept 
of a self-learning digital twin was transformed into a 
technological blue-print, which is shown in Figure 3 based on
[25]. The structural and procedural information concerning the 
product and the production system are generated using both the 
ontologies, vocabulary and rules based on GBDLs (compare 
Section 3) and product and production operation data 
(measurements, parameters). This information is stored in 
graph-based form in a consistent knowledge graph. The unique 
quality of the application of the design compiler integrated in 
DC43 is the capability to create 3D geometry information from 
this knowledge graph. The knowledge graph also allows to 
build simulations using FMUs achieving a modular co-
simulation environment for complex production system 
real production und real product
self- learning digital twin
product model
 production model
behavior model
sensors,
also 
optical
and 3D
PPS-
systems
external
data
sources
simulation
semantic
annotation
AI
neuronal nets
automatic description of the
AI models (explainable AI)
examination of AI models concerning
plausibility and causality
(semantic machine learning)
operation and performance data
machine learning


===== PAGE 4 =====
64 Timo Schuchter  et al. / Procedia CIRP 136 (2025) 61–66
operations. Additionally, from the knowledge graph training 
data for machine learning and XAI can be generated and the 
resulting models can also be integrated in from of FMUs in the 
co-simulation environment. It is apparent that GBDLs are an 
essential element of the blueprint; some main characteristics 
and the possibility to represent knowledge in ontologies is the 
focus of the next section.
    Fig. 3. Blueprint of the digital twin
3. GBDLs ontologies for knowledge representation
Since several years, engineering frameworks based on 
GBDLs are in the center of large-scale research projects [26],
[27] and have found several applications in industry. For a 
detailed description, the publications [28], [29], and [30] can be 
consulted. In this paper, the discussions of GBDLs is 
concentration on the application of ontologies for knowledge 
representation. To clarify their contribution, the general 
information flow in graph-based design languages is shown in 
Figure 4 compare [31], [27].
Fig. 4. Information flow in GBDLs (compare [31], [27])
The central entities of a GBDL are the vocabulary (e.g. the 
components of a product) and the rules (e.g. information how 
components can be incorporated in a product). These entities 
can be represented using UML and the information can be 
stored in a central knowledge graph (compare also Figure 3). 
The information content of a GBDL for a certain product family 
is enormous; an efficient application of GBDLs requires the 
availability of engineering knowledge in a sensible and pre-
structured form this can be achieved by employing ontologies.
In general, ontologies dispose a representation vocabulary 
providing a set of terms to describe entities in a specific domain; 
and a body of knowledge providing a set of facts associated 
with conceptual models [32], [33]. Through this, an ontology 
specifies the characteristics of models, makes them explicit and 
can be referred to as knowledge models [34]. Ontologies 
arrange, classify and categorize (compare [33]) entities and 
their relationships and may include axioms (widely accepted 
principles which are fundamental concepts of certain entities or 
processes [35]: In engineering frameworks based on GBDLs, 
these ontologies concern different domains:
The requirement domain: the central entity in this domain 
are requirements. Requirements can belong to certain 
categories (e. g. functional requirements vs. property 
requirements), can be part of a requirement hierarchy and 
can be associated to modules, components and features of 
the technical system (compare [27]).
The functional domain : the central entity in this domain 
are processes which realize certain functional requirements. 
Another very important entity are operands in form of 
matter, energy and signal. Important associations concern 
actors, use cases and stakeholders (compare [36]).   
The abstract physics domain : the central entity in this 
domain are the physical and logical phenomena which
realize the processes as well as the static and dynamic 
behavior of modules, components and features of the 
technical system.
The geometry domain: the central entity is the geometry of 
modules, components and features of the technical system. 
The geometrical features inherit from abstract geometrical 
features (e. g. cylinder) and allow volume addition and 
subtraction operations. 
The technology domain : the central entity are 
technological realizations of physical and logical 
phenomena. Established technologies and innovations can 
be represented.
The kinetics domain: this domain is a specialization of the 
abstract physics domain concentrating on movements of 
components, joint and degrees of freedom as well as forces, 
moments, stresses and deformations (compare CIRP 
KIDZ). These entities can also be the structural input 
information for FMUs in a co-simulation environment [37].
The assembly domain : the central entities are assembly 
processes, assembly resources and assembly layout 
considerations. This domain is the special focus of later 
parts of this paper.  
In the blueprint of the self-learning DT (compare Figure 3) 
FMUs play a central role for the seamless integration of AI in 
simulation processes. This aspect is the focus of the next 
section.
4. FMUs modular integration of AI
This section is focusing on a modular simulation and co-
simulation environment as part of a self-learning DT and the 
seamless integration of AI models in this environment. A 
promising approach for simulation modularization is the 
application of FMUs, which are defined in the functional mock-
up interface (FMI) standard developed by the Modelica 
association [4], [37]. The FMI standard provides a standardized 
interface and allows the exchange and encoding of simulation 
data. The complete system can be decomposed into sub-models, 
which can separately be simulated. One exemplary advantage 
in kinematic applications is the fact that mechanically rigid 
couplings can be avoided which may lead to unwanted 
3D geometry Simulation
Learning data
M achine 
Learning M odel
Co - Simulation
DesignCompiler43
Ontologies, Vocabulary, Rules
Product operation data
Production operation data
M easurements, Parameters
create
build
generate
learn
FMU FMU FMU
save save
Iterative 
flow of
information
XAI
design language
(definition and programming)
design language
(compilation and execution)
design graph
central UML-
product data model
Design
Compiler43®
UML activity
diagram
vocabulary
rules
geometry
control
FEM
CFD
cost
domain specific
models and tools
geometry
ontology
kinetics
ontology
assembly
ontology
topology
ontology
requirement
ontology
function
ontology
abstract physics
ontology
behavior


===== PAGE 5 =====
Timo Schuchter  et al. / Procedia CIRP 136 (2025) 61–66 65
oscillations. Essentially, a FMU may be realized as a file 
directory which contains a "modelDescription.xml" file. This 
file describes the input and output of the FMU and what type of 
parameter are used. The main advantage of Co-Simulation with 
FMUs instead of a monolithic simulation is the flexibility to use
different simulations tools such as but also to incorporate AI 
and XAI models. The main aspects of this approach are shown 
in Figure 5.
Fig. 5. Modular co-simulation environment with XAI model(s)
It is important to note that not only simulation tools (such as 
) and AI/XAI models can be 
connected without changing the simulation architecture, but 
also hardware-in-the-loop (HiL) systems. By means of the 
integration of AI/XAI into the co-simulation environment via
FMUs, the opportunity arises to use AI in all domains or 
intended simulations; design engineers gain the flexibility to
alternate between conventional physical simulations and AI 
based FMUs. Also, the visualization of simulation results can 
be part of the co-simulation environment, e.g. using the 
shown in Figure 6.
Fig. 6. 
The sample application is a Festo automated assembly 
plant, which contains a slide for a product component which 
applies air pressure for friction reduction. The friction behavior 
in this kind of situation cannot easily be modelled. It was 
possible to learn an accurate machine learning model and to 
develop an XAI decision tree. Figure 6 shows this example as 
, the simulation of a slide of a Festo 
a
In Unity, the visualization of static and dynamic components
can be performed and collision occurrence and characteristics 
can be defined. In fact, the entire scene in Fig. 6 is automatically 
generated via translation of GBDLs inside DC43 and serves as 
an example of such an automated process chain. 
5. Application of the framework
One of the cornerstones of the proposed approach is the 
storage of product, production sequence and production system 
in one consistent model together with product operation data as 
well as production operation data. The integrated development 
framework that enables this, is shown in Figure 7. 
Fig. 7. Integrated development framework
It is a well-known fact, that data need reference (meaning) 
to become information and that information needs context in 
order to become knowledge. A knowledge graph as visible in 
Figure 7, which can serve for AI implementation, needs to 
contain product operation data and production operations, but 
also the reference entities such as product sub-modules or 
assembly processes. These entities need to be connected in a 
sensible manner to describe the context.
In the upper part of Figure 7, the essential model-to-model 
transformation are visible, which allow a seamless connection 
of product and production entities. From the product structure 
with parts and assemblies the assembly sequence as well as the 
assembly system is automatically generated; one example result 
is shown in Figure 8.
Fig. 8. Result of the framework application
    The Figures. 6, 7, and 8 illustrate the generative power of the 
automated information flow in GBDLs as explained in Section 
3, for which the design graph serves as the knowledge graph as 
the central repository of all design and production knowledge
which can be mapped in arbitrary target formats.  
6. Conclusions and outlook
The main intention of the research described in this paper is 
the development of a framework which allows the application 
of AI in MBSE development processes of products and the 
respective production systems. Initially the concept o a self-
learning DT was explained; this DT combines product, 
3D geometry Si mul at i on
Learning dat a
M achine 
Learning M odel
Co - Simulation
creat e
build
gener at e
learn
FMU FMU FMU
XAI
FMU FMU FMU
FMU visualizat ion
Learning data
Product
operation
data
Production 
operation
data
generat e
save save


===== PAGE 6 =====
66 Timo Schuchter  et al. / Procedia CIRP 136 (2025) 61–66
production system, simulation, and operation information in 
order to enable AI/XAI application. The means to achieve the 
information combination in this DT are GBDLs; such GBDLs 
lead to the storage of all relevant information with the context 
in a consistent central data model  the knowledge graph. 
Another main challenge in the DT application is the simulation 
of dynamic processes. In the proposed concept of the self-
learning DT, FMUs enable a modular simulation environment. 
FMUs can be AI based; such AI-FMUs can be seamlessly 
integrated in the simulation environment and can interact with 
conventional FMUs based on e. g. differential equations 
describing physical relationships. 
Acknowledgements 
Parts of the described research were funded in by the Carl 
Zeiss Foundation in the scope of the project AI-based digital 
twin (KI-basierter digitaler Zwilling - KIDZ). 
References 
[1] Peretz-Andersson, E., Tabares, S., Mikalef, P., & Parida, V. (2024). 
Artificial intelligence implementation in manufacturing SMEs: A 
resource orchestration approach. International Journal of Information 
Management, 77, 102781. 
[2] Demlehner, Q., Schoemer, D., & Laumer, S. (2021). How can artificial 
intelligence enhance car manufacturing? A Delphi study-based 
identification and assessment of general use cases. International Journal 
of Information Management, 58, 102317. 
[3] IILS mbH. Design Complier 43 . (2024) Online: https://www.iils.de 
(accessed on 15 October 2024). 
[4] Miller, M., Pfeil, M., & Kennel, R. (2023). Trailer ElectrificationA HIL 
Approach for MPC Powertrain Control to Ensure Driver Safety in 
Micromobility (No. 2023-24-0180). SAE Technical Paper. 
[5] VDI/VDE 2206: Entwicklung cyber-physischer mechatronischer 
Systeme (CPMS). Beuth: 2020. 
[6] Rana, K., & Khatri, N. (2024). Automotive intelligence: Unleashing the 
potential of AI beyond advance driver assisting system, a 
comprehensive review. Computers and Electrical Engineering, 117, 
109237. 
[7] Leberruyer, N., Bruch, J., Ahlskog, M., & Afshar, S. (2023). Toward 
Zero Defect Manufacturing with the support of Artificial Intelligence
Insights from an industrial application. Computers in Industry, 147, 
103877. 
[8] Abbasi, S., & Rahmani, A. M. (2023). Artificial intelligence and 
software modeling approaches in autonomous vehicles for safety 
management: a systematic review. Information, 14(10), 555. 
[9] Olatunde, T. M., Okwandu, A. C., Akande, D. O., & Sikhakhane, Z. Q. 
(2024). Reviewing the role of artificial intelligence in energy efficiency 
optimization. Engineering Science & Technology Journal, 5(4), 1243-
1256. 
[10] Ghoreishi, M., & Happonen, A. (2020, May). Key enablers for 
deploying artificial intelligence for circular economy embracing 
sustainable product design: Three case studies. In AIP conference 
proceedings (Vol. 2233, No. 1). AIP Publishing. 
[11] Gutierrez, D. P., Folkmann, L. M., Tribukait, H., & Roch, L. M. (2023). 
How to accelerate R&D and optimize experiment planning with 
machine learning and data science. Chimia, 77(1/2), 7-16. 
[12] https://oagi.org/pages/industrial-ontologies. Accessed on 03.02.2025. 
[13] https://rds.posccaesar.org/ontology/lis14/. Accessed on 03.02.2025. 
[14] https://www.dnv.com/digital-trust/recommended-practices/asset-
information-modelling-dnv-rp-0670/. Accessed on 03.02.2025. 
[15] https://industrialdigitaltwin.org/en/technology. Acc. on 03.02.2025. 
[16] Lyu, Z. Handbook of Digital Twins. CRC Press: 2024. 
[17] http://www.uml.org/. Accessed on 03.02.2025. 
[18] Trauer, J., Schweigert-Recksiek, S., Engel, C., Spreitzer, K., & 
Zimmermann, M. (2020, May). What is a digital twin? definitions and 
insights from an industrial case study in technical product development. 
In Proceedings of the design society: DESIGN conference (Vol. 1, pp. 
757-766). Cambridge University Press. 
[19] Soldatova, L., 
Soru, T., ... & Zafar, H. (2018). ML-schema: exposing the semantics of 
machine learning with schemas and ontologies. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1807.05351. 
[20] McGuinness, D. L., Ding, L., Da Silva, P. P., & Chang, C. (2007, July). 
PML 2: A Modular Explanation Interlingua. In ExaCt (pp. 49-55). 
[21] Chen, J., Lécué, F., Pan, J. Z., Horrocks, I., & Chen, H. (2018, 
September). Knowledge-based transfer learning explanation. In 
Sixteenth International Conference on Principles of Knowledge 
Representation and Reasoning. 
[22] Mahajan, D., Tan, C., & Sharma, A. (2019). Preserving causal 
constraints in counterfactual explanations for machine learning 
classifiers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.03277. 
[23] Geng, Y., Chen, J., Jiménez -Ruiz, E., & Chen, H. (2019). Human-
centric transfer learning explanation via knowledge graph. arXiv 
preprint arXiv:1901.08547. 
[24] Confalonieri, R., del Prado, F. M., Agramunt, S., Malagarriga, D., 
Faggion, D., Weyde, T., & Besold, T. R. (2019). An ontology-based 
approach to explaining artificial neural networks. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1906.08362. 
[25] Arff, B., Haasis, J., Thomas, J., Bonenberger, C., Höpken, W., & Stetter, 
R. (2023). Analysis and visualization of production bottlenecks as part 
of a digital twin in industrial IoT. Applied Sciences, 13(6), 3525. 
[26] Rudolph, S. A Semantic Validation Scheme for Graph-Based 
Engineering Design Grammars. In: Gero, John (ed): Proceedings Design 
560, 
2006. 
[27] Holder, K., Zech, A., Ramsaier, M., Stetter, R., Niedermeier, H.-P., 
Rudolph, S. and Till, M. (2017) "Model-Based Requirements 
Management in Gear Systems Design based on Graph-Based Design 
Languages". Appl. Sci. 2017, 7, 1112, doi:10.3390/app7111112. 
[28] Schopper, D., Tonhäuser, C. (2021). A User-friendly Planning Tool for 
Assembly Sequence Optimization. In Advances in Automotive 
Production Technology Theory and Application: Stuttgart Conference 
on Automotive Production (SCAP2020) (pp. 28-36). Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg. 
[29] Dinkelacker, J.; Kaiser, D.; Panzeri, M.; Parmentier, P.; Neumaier, M.; 
Schopper, C.; Rudolph, S;. (2023). System integration based on packing, 
piping and harness routing automation using graph-based design 
languages. CEAS Aeronautical Journal. 14. 10.1007/s13272-023-
00642-5. 
[30] Zech, A.; Stetter, R.; Till, M.; Rudolph, S.: Automated Generation of 
Clamping Concepts and Assembly Cells for Car Body Parts for the 
Digitalization of Automobile Production. Stuttgart Conference of 
Automotive Production SCAP 2020, 2nd to 10th November 2020. 
[31] Rudolph, S. On the problem of multi-disciplinary system design And 
a solution approach using graph-based design languages. In Proceedings 
of the 1st ACCMWorkshop on Mechatronic Design, Linz, Austria, 30 
November 2012. 
[32] Yang, L., Cormican, K., & Yu, M. (2019). Ontology-based systems 
engineering: A state-of-the-art review. Computers in Industry, 111, 148-
171. 
[33] Arista, R., Zheng, X., Lu, J., & Mas, F. (2023). An Ontology-based 
Engineering system to support aircraft manufacturing system design. 
Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 68, 270-288. 
[34] Darlington, M. J., & Culley, S. J. (2008). Investigating ontology 
development for engineering design support. Advanced Engineering 
Informatics, 22(1), 112-134. 
[35] Kulak, O., Cebi, S., & Kahraman, C. (2010). Applications of axiomatic 
design principles: A literature review. Expert systems with applications, 
37(9), 6705-6717. 
[36] Elwert, M., Ramsaier, M., Eisenbart, B., Stetter, R., Till, M., & Rudolph, 
S. (2022). Digital function modeling in graph-based design languages. 
Applied Sciences, 12(11), 5301. 
[37] Saft, P.; Pfeil, M.; Stetter, R.; Till, M.; Rudolph, S.: Integration of 
geometry modelling and behavior simulation based on graph-based 
design languages and functional mockup units. Procedia CIRP 2024. 